Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we've been
talking about multisets and slight innovation
called interval multi-sets last time and I want
to show you how these kinds of ideas fit naturally
into elementary number theory just talking about
natural numbers and prime factorization so that's
we're going to talk about today so we all know the
fundamental theorem of arithmetic going back to
Euclid absolutely core aspect of the way we think
about numbers which is that every natural number
greater than one can be written as a product of
prime numbers in essentially a unique way that
means that we can change the order of the primes
but otherwise the factorization is unique so this
is certainly a fundamental and foundational
theorem the statement is perhaps not quite
as pleasant as one might hope it to be because we
have to talk about this factorization and the non
uniqueness in terms of rearranging the ordering
it takes a little bit of care to say that in the
precise way we're going to be talking about that
in today's video giving an alternate kind of way
of thinking about how to State or frame the result
but I should also tell you that unfortunately this
theorem is not really true in general this is a
much more serious issue and we are gonna have to
talk a lot about this at some future time okay so
let me just flag this that this is a theorem only
kind of let me give you an alternate kind of way
of stating what this theorem might be about let's
say it this way that for any natural number n less
than or equal to 10 to the 10 cubed there is an M
set P belong to am set of n of prime numbers that
the actual number n is the product over all the
peas in this M set of P so this symbol pi this
capital PI means product sort of analogous to
the Sigma notation meaning some so it means we're
taking a product over these kind of indices but
this is an index over a multiset so we have to
include each one of the elements in the multiset
as many times as it actually appears in the multi
set and this product of primes P in this M set P
which we could say is P of n so let me illustrate
this for example if n is 12 then multi set P is 2
2 3 so it's an M set of prime numbers and if you
take the product of these prime numbers you get
2 times 2 times 3 which is in fact 12 if n is
726 then this M set is 2 3 1111 these are the
prime factors of this and some bigger number
here this is 52 million 387,000 132 then it
turns out that the corresponding prime m set is
2 2 7 17 157 and 701 and if it happens to be 40
1243 that turns out to be a prime number so in
that case the m set just consists of that single
prime number so you'll probably be wondering
what's going on here with this condition so
I'm saying an less than or equal to 10 to the 10
cubed so 10 cubed is a thousand so we're talking
about numbers in the hindu-arabic form whose total
number of digits is less than or equal to thousand
essentially so we're restricting our view here
to numbers which can be pretty big a lot bigger
than the numbers that we usually work with but
who are definitely bounded so we're not making
a statement about numbers which are bigger than
this particular bound now there's certainly a lot
of scope for changing this so at first I thought
maybe I should just put a two here for a with a
two there so ten to the hundred I'm certain that
this is absolutely true and we can all verify this
at least with our computers you take a number
with a hundred digits or so your computer can
actually factor that into primes however if you
take a number with a thousand digits your computer
struggles sometimes to factor it and won't be
able to factor it if you choose sort of a wrong
number or the right number so computationally
this is already getting to the limits of what
our computers can actually do now that's not to
say that in 10 years time our computers can't
do a lot more in which case we might be able
to bump this thing up but you might also say
well what about theoretically well so it turns
out that even theoretically independent of what
our computers can actually do there is some issue
about what happens when numbers get big and this
is going to be an important topic that would have
to say a lot more about talk more about arithmetic
with big numbers and the very sort of specific
difficulties that start to emerge once you look
at bigger and bigger numbers and their arithmetic
so I'm just sort of giving a preview of that kind
of dilemma here in this statement but what we want
to concentrate on today is the role of this multi
set this multi set consisting of the primes which
figure in the decomposition of natural number n so
it's really the multi set itself which is somehow
the fundamental thing it's every natural number
has this Associated multi set of primes and it's
maybe not something that you think about if you
have a very much of a set theoretic point of view
because it's crucial that we allow multiplicities
because as we all know the prime factors can
occur with multiplicities but if we are happy
with working with M sets then it's very very
natural for us to consider this kind of object
as associated to the natural numbers and this sort
of clarifies a number of issues in number theory
it's not a profound deep kind of observation but
it's a simple observation that allows us to see
things perhaps in a in a pleasant way since we're
considering this multiset to be rather important
object let's give it a kind of official name so
let's define P which is P then to be the prime
M set of M so we'll say that if considering the
number 726 that P of 726 is this is the prime M
set of 726 and we recall that an M set like this
can be written in a number of different ways so we
could also write it in this kind of form where we
basically determine the various multiplicities of
the primes and write it in this additive notation
that we can do because we're talking about M sets
so as the M set - plus the M set three plus two
times the M set eleven this form we might call
the multiplicity form of the prime M set and
it very clearly lays out for us what are the
primes and what are the various multiplicities
that they occur in the in the factorization of n
ok so then there's a natural number theoretical
kind of object that one can associate to this
Omega n this is a relatively standard notation
so Omega n is the number of elements in P of n
so it's in this case four so it's the number
of total factors in this prime factorization
and the various Prime's that occur in P then
have these multiplicities and sometimes we are
interested in the multiplicities and so we can
form a secondary M set which we might call M van
standing for most assists so where M of n is just
recording the multiplicities of the various primes
which occur in the prime M set so for example for
726 the prime 2 has multiplicity 1 the prime 3 is
multiplicity 1 the prime xi is multiplicity
2 so M of 726 just records the multiplicities
and forgets about the actual Prime's themselves
so sort of loses information but it's a simpler
kind of object and then W of n can be defined to
be the size of MN so in this case would be 3 so
that's counting the number of distinct prime the
factors of the natural number Antonin so here are
some fundamental natural number sort of functions
associated to these perhaps even more fundamental
data structures associated to the natural number n
the prime M set of N and this a secondary sort of
multiplicity M set of an and now we have a very
natural and important sort of fact that for any
natural numbers N and M the prime m set of the
product n times n is the sum of the prime m set
of n with the prime m set of m and this is saw me
in the sense of M set edition where we just take
the two m sets and dump them together to form a
bigger upset so for example P of 12 is the M set
2 to 3 P of 7 to 6 we've seen as the m set 2 to 3
1111 so if we multiply these two numbers together
we get 8712 and its prime m said it's just the sum
of these two which is just what you get when you
put them all together so 2 2 2 3 3 11 11 so all
the multiplicities of various primes simply add
that's kind of obvious right so at the level of
these prime m sets multiplication which is usually
the more complicated sort of basic operation has
a very simple form terms of multiplication you're
just adding the corresponding primum sets all
the difficulty from the point of view of Prime
and sets rests essentially in the other operation
that of addition okay so how do you find the prime
M set of n plus M if you know the prime M set of
N and the prime M set of M well this is a very
very profound kind of number theoretical question
about which we know essentially nothing there's
nothing so non-trivial really that I think we
know it's promised fair to say so if you could
make any kind of significant statement about how
to find this in terms of those you would become
famous very quickly but nevertheless abstractly
we could still introduce a kind of operation on
these prime m sets to correspond to the addition
of the corresponding natural numbers so we could
define P of n so circle sum P of M in this context
to mean the prime M set of the sum then and M yeah
but just because you know the prime factorization
of one number and you know the prime factorization
of another number how are we gonna find the prime
factorization of there's some pretty well the
only thing you you can do is you can calculate
their sum and then work hard to find its prime
factorization doesn't seem to be any more direct
way of doing that I'd like to briefly mention just
a few standard number theoretical functions which
play their important role in the theory tau N and
move in so tau of n is the number of divisors
of N and that can be stated relatively simply
in terms of the M set M of n as a product over
m in M of n of M plus 1 so for example tau of
726 is the product of the M plus ones as M ranges
over 1 1 2 that's the multiplicity M set of 726
and so we have to multiply two times two times
three which is total of 12 telling us that tau
of this the number of divisors of this thing from
1 up to itself is 12 and so for example towel 105
105 is a product of 3 5 & 7 so it's multiplicity M
said it's just 1 1 1 then towel that would be the
product of 2 times 2 times 2 which is 8 another
famous number theoretic function is the möbius
function you need noted mu of n which is a little
bit more complicated to write down but one way of
saying what it is is with this formula that if
the number of elements or the size of MN happens
to equal a size of p n then the möbius function
is minus 1/2 this common size and otherwise it's
zero what this is saying if you think about it
is that these two things will be equal when the
number has prime factors which are all appearing
with multiplicity 1 so there are no repeated prime
factors if the number n has that property then
the mute then is minus 1 to the that number so
if it has an odd number of prime factors its minus
1 have an even number of prime factors it's equal
to plus 1 so mu of 7 to 6 this had a total of
while there were 3 in this set and 4 in this set
so they were not equal so mu of 726 would be 0 but
mu of 105 that has three distinct prime factors 3
5 and 7 and so mu of that is minus 1 cubed which
is minus 1 okay so we can see that there's some
elementary number theory attica functions which
they're closely linked to these M sets P of N and
M of n it's worth pointing out in this story that
there's also a role for the concept of a list here
and that's because the prime numbers themselves
are naturally ordered by size so there's the first
prime 2 and then 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 and
so on so we could talk about the first prime the
third prime the seventh prime and so on so what we
can do now to natural number n is associate what
we might call a prime list L or L of n which is
the list of multiplicities in the prime M set P of
n so P van records the various Prime's that occur
in the factorization of n so if n is 12 and we saw
that P of 12 was the M set to 2 3 so we can make
a list out of that by saying okay well in terms of
this list the first prime occurs twice the second
prime occurs once so we can make the list 2 comma
1 giving us the multiplicities of the Prime's
in their correct order so for example for 726 we
saw that the prime M said was 2 3 1111 and so we
can associate to that the list 1 1 0 0 2 just the
various multiplicities of the primes that occur
using this standard 4 during of the primes 175 0 0
2 1 because there's 2 5 and 1 7 and 31 well that's
a prime and flip it further on and list so we have
to have 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 and that finally a
watch so practically speaking you can see this is
going to be more useful if the numbers relatively
small and all the prime factors are very small
we're talking about very big numbers that
typically have very big Prime's and then these
lists are going to be very long but nevertheless
sort of theoretically this is another useful tool
for us to think about as a way of representing
or understanding or capturing this all-important
prime factorization of a natural number now I want
to extend our discussion a little bit and consider
fractions and corresponding intro em sets so
integral Lam sets are these more general kinds of
data structures they're like am sets or AM multi
sets but elements can occur with negative multiple
City as well as positive zero multiplicities
and we're gonna see that this naturally fits
in in this discussion when we tried to sort of
extend thinking about prime factorizations of
natural numbers to prime factorizations for
fractions so a fraction I remind you was an
expression of the form M over N we ramit and our
natural numbers so we're just thinking about like
positive rational numbers now okay things which
are greater than zero so the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic naturally extends to fractions and
therefore naturally leads us to consider integral
m sets so for example if we have five thousand one
hundred twenty three over one hundred thirty-five
then the numerator has a factorization which is
in this case is forty seven times one hundred
nine and the denominator has a factorization
which is three cubed times five now in this
case this fraction was already in reduced form it
didn't have any common factors in the numerator
and denominator that could also happen of course
in which case we would then sort of remove those
common factors before we went to the next step
the next step is to recognize that we have here
really the makings of an integral am set because
the numerator which is an ordinary natural number
has a prime m set just as we were talking about
namely forty seven and 109 and the denominator of
course also has a prime m set but it's natural
to put these together into an integral M set
for the fraction itself what happens there
is that the prime factors of the numerator
occur with positive multiplicity and the prime
factors of the denominator occur with negative
multiplication that 3 cubed is represented by
a 3 occurring there with multiplicity minus
3 and so a five occurring negatively so more
complicated example here's some bigger fraction
here is a prime factorization for it and then
the corresponding prime integral M set would be
the M set the integral M set where you put the
factors of the numerator there with positive
multiplicity in other words in the regular kind of
fashion but the denominators factors figure with
negative multiple cities this is a very natural
thing to do okay and it sort of reveals that this
integral M set notion is really not so strange as
you might think it's really a justification for
why it's a useful concept because it's exactly
encoding what we wanted to encode namely the
factorization of these fractions so it naturally
gives us an extension of the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic from natural numbers to fractions
just clearly a useful thing so we've expanded our
view here to think about these prime m sets also
for fractions so this fundamental result that we
saw for natural numbers now extends to fractions
but in addition we get a second kind of formula
that covers division as well it's the advantage in
going to fractions is that we can introduce this
new operation of division so for any fractions are
as the prime integral M set of the product RS is
the sum of the individual prime integral m sets
well now the primary goal M set of the quotient R
over s will be the difference of Pilar minus P of
s and so here's just an illustration to show you
that here's a number R and s here at corresponding
factorizations here the corresponding integral M
sets or prime integral M sets so there's two cubed
represented by those twos on the numerator and
also five squared represented by those two fives
and there's a three seven and nineteen they're
all appearing with negative multiple cities here
because they're in the denominator then second
area here we have a two a seven to thirteen and
then the three a three and a five with negative
multiple cities when we take the quotient are
over a so we're going to get this thing here
and then multiplying essentially by the reciprocal
of the second one that's how you take the quotient
when you get a two squared 3 all together because
there'll be a three square coming on top there and
canceling with that three there'll be five cubed
all together in terms of 5s and the denominator we
have the 3s are gone there's a seven here seven
will be augmented by the seven here and this
will be giving a seven squared and then there's
a thirteen and a nineteen here and so the prime
integral lamp set of the quotient has a two two
three three fives and then in the negative part of
it 7 a 7 13 and 19 and hopefully we can see that
this is indeed what you get when you take this
integral am set and you subtract this interval am
set remember that you can do that just by doing
basically each element multiplicity separately
so the number of twos here is three the number of
twos here is one the difference is two so when we
take this thing - this thing we get to occurring
twice and same thing with all the other elements
so this just illustrates that this idea of an
integral am set is pretty natural in this context
of working with the arithmetic of fractions so I
want to finish by sort of observing that when
we're doing arithmetic with these fractions in
the context of these integral M sets that
multiplication and division is very simple
we're just working with sums and differences of
these MCs addition and corresponding subtraction
is of course much harder but I want to point out
that the difficulty of addition in this setting is
not really appreciable more than the difficulty
of addition with just regular natural numbers
okay so usually addition with fractions is for
most students considerably more challenging than
addition with natural numbers you have to remember
this formula a over B plus C over D equals a times
D plus B times C over B times D I suppose so
let's illustrate this with an example suppose
we have two fractions and an M and this one is
117 over 50 and here's its prime integral M set
and the second one is 35 over 40 for the factor is
5 times 7 in the numerator and 2 times 2 times in
11 in the denominator okay so we've seen that the
product is just obtained by taking the sum so you
just take this from respecting the multiplicities
and you get that for the prime integral lamp set
and the quotient again it's just obtained by
taking the differences of the two prime m sets
now let's consider more interesting with the the
sum of these two fractions okay so we are using
this sort of circle sum addition to represent
how addition looks like at the level of these
m sets okay so let's have a look at what actually
happens here so I'm gonna rewrite this P of n and
this P of n here in a slightly non-standard
way what I'm gonna do first of all I'm gonna
put all the negative multiplicity objects in the
second row and all the positive ones in the top
row it makes it live it easier to read and so it
corresponds more clearly to the fraction that's
just a notational convenience for us it doesn't
actually have any meaning as far as the M set
itself goes but notice that what I've done here
is I've rewritten things but I've changed it a
little bit so here we just had a two five five
in the denominator before a negative two and
negative five and negative five now I also have a
negative 2 and a negative 11 and to compensate to
that I've introduced a 2 and 11 up here so that
that positive 2 and that negative 2 these are
just multiplicities of to essentially cancel out
similarly this 11 and this negative 11 in terms of
multiplicity is essentially cancel out the reason
I've done that is because I'm essentially cooking
up the am set equivalent of common denominators
I've looked at the negative occurrences there and
the negative occurrences here and then figured
out which is the well basically then the union
of those here the negative entries 2 2 5 5 and
11 so that covers both this one and this one and
I've repeated things over here now in order for
this to equal this I've also had to introduce
some more fellows in the numerator because going
from here to here I've added a 5 and a 5 with
multiplicity minus 1 down there and so I have
to add a 5 and a 5 plus some one multiplicity
up there so let me make the remark that so with
integral M sets there is now this possibility
of having more than one way of writing down an M
set it's not just multiplicity positive because
we have multiplicity positive or a multiplicity
negative and if we have a +1 multiplicity and
a -1 multiple see that sort of amounts to zero
multiplicity so technically speaking we we could
allow ourselves to do this and it's a convenient
kind of thing to do in this case because now if we
think about adding the corresponding fractions
this corresponds exactly to the usual formula
for adding fractions in other words we can sort of
peel off this common negative part namely negative
2 negative 2 negative 5 negative 5 negative n'
and then peel off the positive parts which are 3 3
13 to 11 and 5 7 5 5 so what we have to do here
is we have to take the sum this circle some nodes
we basically have to compute this natural number
we have to compute this natural number we have to
take the regular sum of those two natural numbers
and then we have to factor that and then we take
the regular em set some with this negative part
so you can think about that but the point that I'm
trying to make here is that at the level of these
integral m sets the arithmetic with fractions
is necessarily complicated because there's this
circle some kind of operation which is very very
hard to do but that it's not really appreciably
more difficult than just circle summing ordinary
natural numbers which corresponds to the fact that
when you add fractions you you know you do have to
add natural numbers up in the numerator ok so some
addition has to be done but that's essentially as
much as there is so that's a small observation
that I am I put out out there for your amusement
ok so we've been talking about multi sets and
that they are quite interesting objects that
they form a very legitimate a powerful tool in
many different situations and we are going to
see a lot more applications of am sets further
on but I think the next thing that we have to
do is go back to our four basic kinds of data
structures lists order sets m sets and sets
and now cover the last one in our list which we
still haven't actually gotten around to talking
about sets okay so sets are of course also
very important kinds of data structures but
they should be thought of as being one of
these four different types not necessarily
better not necessarily worse just one of
four that's what we do in our next video
I will look at sets I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening